---
layout: post
title: Gig economy and its discontents
description: 
---

Since its inception with the rise of the internet, the Gig economy's had a bad reputation, and with the latest <a href="https://www.fastcompany.com/90429522/yet-another-gig-company-is-changing-the-rules-for-workers">Incident</a> regarding online transcription service Rev (link), it doesn't seem it will get better. Namely, Rev decided to cut pay from 0.45$ per minute of audio to 0.30$, which means that Rev workers will receive 3$ an hour with this latest change. Truly 
a "slave wage" worth its name.  Furthermore, this means that Rev is now takin between 50-70% of what customers pay for projects, which compares dismally even to other Gig economy businesses like Uber (link to Twitter post). 

But not everything is so bleak. One of the dissatisfied workers contacted major journalist publications and started an online campaign against Rev. The story was covered widely enough to pressure Rev into explaining themselves, and the explanation turns out to be even more interesting than the original problem: "The price increases on harder jobs and the price decreases on easier jobs are about the same when you add them up. (link Gizmodo) " It turns out that Rev is using an algorithm to determine the value of compensation for transcription jobs by evaluating the audio quality of transcription files (link). Lousy quality audio quality files pay more because that's where human labor in the transcription business is worth the most. In 2019 machine learning technology can reach 95% accuracy under the perfect conditions (link, second NY times), which leaves humans to correct transcriptions done by AI or pick up the files it can't handle. The machine can also be thrown off by different dialect or speech impediments, and every individual language has its particular machine learning adaptation because it requires a different set of rules. For example, Mandarine is a tonal language, and when you say a word in a different pitch, it changes the meaning of the word. For English, it's desirable to set parameters that limit registering changes in tone, as English operates differently than Mandarine in that regard (link). 

Of course, AI transcription is simply a reality at this point, and since there will never be perfect conditions under which AI can do its job, there will always be some room for human labor, however minuscule in this particular industry. The actual AI threat, though, comes not so much from job takeover, but from AI being the pricing arbiter, which presents the opportunity to "cook the books," to use a financial fraud term. If the source code is not open, it can have a baked-in agenda that runs contrary to advertised intentions, and the rebelled worker already noticed the discrepancy: "Some of the $0.30 jobs have terrible audio and 20 speakers, and there are higher-paying jobs that are inexplicably pretty clear." (link) In addition, new-generation AI transcription services promise complete replacement of the note-taking process, which opens new frontiers for exchanging privacy for comfort since data is streamed directly to the cloud for processing. (link) One could imagine a scenario in which a privacy issue around transcribing technologies becomes so pervasive that it starts a new historical trend in language evolution, where languages would adapt to fool the machine learning systems. 

But along with the nature of work, the online world is changing the way workers protest. Social media (Twitter primarily) provides vast opportunities for credibility assassination, so the companies have to be very careful how they are navigating these waters, even though such an environment has its obvious downsides for everyone involved. The rebelled worker is organizing a transcription network as support (link), and there already is a Transcription Essentials forum which doesn't allow job postings under 1$ per minute. The future of work in the age of AI is open and can evolve in many different directions than the usual "human labor apocalypse" scenario. 














